Qos 8 (#157)
SW709E19/Report: report/ChapterTest/QoS/QualityofService.tex

\section{Quality of Service}
This section describes the quality of service of the system in terms of limitations and guarantees.
Henceforth Quality of Service will be refereed to as QoS.

> \textbf{Power Consumption Measurements}

Reviewer: ```suggestion

\textbf{Power Consumption Measurements}
```

\textbf{Power Consumption Measurements}
The sensor device is powered by a 2000mAh 5V battery, and when using an ESP32 without the development board, and using on/sleep cycles, the battery should last at least 2 months as describe in~\autoref{sec:sprint-log-2}

\textbf{Maximum Number of Devices Per Gateway - Scalability}

No tests have been conducted to determining how many devices can be connected to a single gateway.
However, there are some other limiting factors that can be determined from examining the hardware.

Wi-Fi bandwith of Raspberry Pi 3 B+ averages at 81.9 Mbits/s in perfect conditions \cite{PiSpeed}.
Another limit of the gateway is that the Raspberry Pi 3 B+ can at most connect to about 250 devices at once \cite{Wi-FiNetwork}.
The CPU and RAM of the Raspberry could also possibly turn out to be the limiting factors.

It is still, however, unclear how many devices could actually be served by one gateway since the sensor devices would only connect during their sample period and would disconnect afterwards.
The total amount of sensor devices would hence be very depending on the sensor device configuration.

\textbf{Failures - Missing Messages}

> The messages that get sent from the sensor device and all the way to the Google Cloud are not lossless, as they are only sent once and no acknowledgement is used to verify its arrival.

Reviewer 2: This is still not explained well. Where is the problem? Device-gateway or gateway-cloud? And why? Move it down under MQTT and explain why it is not lossless

\section{Quality of Service}

> This section is about he quality of service that our product can provide.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This section describes the quality of service of the system in terms of limitations and guarantees.
```

\subsection{Power Consumption Measurements}

> The sensor device is powered by a 2000mAh 5V battery, and when using an ESP32 without the development board, and using on/sleep cycles, the battery should last at least 2 months. See \autoref{sec:sprint-log-2}

Reviewer 2: Why ref to sprint 2? Where are the test results? How did you get 2 months? What are the equations for battery time? Why can we not guarantee battery lifetime?

Author: Sprint 2 is the only place we have this written as of writing the section. We might have the equations in a working document, if not then David has it. Think it was decided to not be included in the report as it's not that important.

\subsection{Maximum Number of Devices Per Gateway - Scalability}

> We have not conducted any tests for determining how many devices can be connected to a single gateway, and we also cannot test this since we do not have that many ESP32's to connect.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We have not conducted any tests for determining how many devices can be connected to a single gateway.
```

However, there are some other limiting factors that can be determined from looking at the hardware.

Wi-Fi bandwith of Raspberry Pi 3 B+ averages at 81.9 Mbits/s in perfect conditions. \cite{PiSpeed}.
Another limit of the gateway is that the Raspberry Pi 3 B+ can at most connect to about 250 devices at once. \cite{Wi-FiNetwork}.

> The CPU and RAM of the Raspberry could also possible turn out to be the limiting factors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The CPU and RAM of the Raspberry could also possibly turn out to be the limiting factors.
```

\subsection{Scalability of Google Cloud}
Should the need arise, Google Cloud is very scaleable.
It is possible to enable autoscale, which means that if the traffic to your service gets too high, Google Cloud will automatically add another instance to take more of the load.
The downside of this however is the cost. \cite{GCloudScaling}.

\subsection{Failures - Missing Messages}

> The messages that get sent from the sensor device and all the way to the Google Cloud are not lossless, as they are only sent once.

Reviewer 2: What are you trying to say? It is as vague as it gets. Be specific. QoS is all about numbers

\subsection{Gateway/Device Crash}

> In case that either the gateway or the sensor device should crash or temporarely lose power, it will restart itself.

Reviewer 2: And then what?

\subsection{Google IoT Core QoS}

> Google IoT Core will have an uptime percentage of at least 99.9\% for their costumers as per the term of agreement.

Reviewer 2: Its more than 99.9 right?

Reviewer: Den er >= 99.9% 
https://cloud.google.com/iot/sla

This is not a garuantee that the uptime percentage will actually be a least 99.9\%, but in case it drops bellow that, Google will start covering part of the monthly bill for their service, which will be credited to future monthly payments. \cite{GCloudSLA}.

\subsection{MQTT QoS}
MQTT has 3 levels of quality of service.
At level 0 it is garuanteed that a specific message is delivered at most once.
However, this means that there is no garuantee that the message gets through at all.
At level 1 it is garuanteed that a specific message is delivered at least once.
This is done by the sender storing the message until it gets an acknowledgment that the message has been received.
At level 2 it is garuanteed that a specific message is delivered exactly once.
This is done by having a four part handshake between the sender and receiver.
A higher level of quality means that there is a higher garuantee that the message has been received, and that it has been received correctly.

> The downside to a higher quality of service is that it is slower. \cite{MQTTQoS}.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The downside to a higher quality of service is that it is slower \cite{MQTTQoS}.
```

Our product uses level 0, which means that we risk losing a bit of data.

> Ideally we should be using level 1, but that is not possible because of a client library that we are currently using.

Reviewer 2: Is this even true? And give some explanations... Its vague and does not explain why!

\subsection{Sensor Device QoS}

\subsubsection{Supported Configurations}
It is possible for the user to change some of the configurations.
These configurations are: sample rate, sample duration, sleep duration.
Sample rate is the frequency at which the sensor device makes measurements. The limit for sample rate is just under 500 hz. \todo{Make a ref to the test.}
Sample duration is the duration where the sensor device makes measurements. It is usually kept short in order to serve battery life.

> Sleep duration is the time between each "batch" of sampels. Sleeping is needed to conserve battery life.

Reviewer 2: THis is still not QoS?! These things have already been explained elsewhere. Just state the hard facts in terms of numbers. And explain the limitations and why

\subsubsection{Max range of Sensor device}
Some versions of the ESP32 can connect to Wi-Fi at a range of 1km when having a clear line of sight.
Inside a factory the range will be much lower than that though.

> As the range increases, the bandwith decreases as well.

Reviewer 2: Find some specific numbers and cite them. 1km seems unrealistic, and what could you actually expect?

Author: Found a cite for 1km. Searced more for a source on normal "out of the box" range for an ESP32, but not finding any results at all. We would have to test it ourselves.

\section{Quality of Service}

> This section describes the quality of service of the system in terms of limitations and guarantees.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This section describes the Quality of Service(QoS) of the system in terms of limitations and guarantees.
```

> Henceforth Quality of Service will be refereed to as QoS.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

\textbf{Power Consumption Measurements}

> The sensor device is powered by a 2000mAh 5V battery, and when using an ESP32 without the development board, and using on/sleep cycles, the battery should last at least 2 months as describe in~\autoref{sec:sprint-log-2}

Reviewer 3: Dette kommer jo an på hvilken configuration ESP32 køre med, hvis den sampler mere og sover mindre holder den ikke 2 måneder

\textbf{Maximum Number of Devices Per Gateway - Scalability}

No tests have been conducted to determining how many devices can be connected to a single gateway.
However, there are some other limiting factors that can be determined from examining the hardware.

Wi-Fi bandwith of Raspberry Pi 3 B+ averages at 81.9 Mbits/s in perfect conditions \cite{PiSpeed}.
Another limit of the gateway is that the Raspberry Pi 3 B+ can at most connect to about 250 devices at once \cite{Wi-FiNetwork}.

> The CPU and RAM of the Raspberry could also possibly turn out to be the limiting factors.

Reviewer 3: Det er meget usandsynligt, og jeg tror der skal være en kilde på det

It is still, however, unclear how many devices could actually be served by one gateway since the sensor devices would only connect during their sample period and would disconnect afterwards.
The total amount of sensor devices would hence be very depending on the sensor device configuration.

\textbf{Scalability of Google Cloud}
Should the need arise, Google Cloud is very scaleable.

> It is possible to enable autoscale, which means that if the traffic to your service gets too high, Google Cloud will automatically add another instance to take more of the load.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is possible to enable autoscale, which means that if the traffic to your service gets too high, Google Cloud will automatically add another instance to balance the load.
```

> The downside of this however is the cost. \cite{GCloudScaling}.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The downside of this however is the cost. \cite{GCloudScaling}
```

\textbf{Google IoT Core QoS}
Google IoT Core will have an uptime percentage of at least 99.9\% for their costumers as per the term of agreement.

> This is not a garuantee that the uptime percentage will actually be a least 99.9\%, but in case it drops bellow that, Google will start covering part of the monthly bill for their service, which will be credited to future monthly payments. \cite{GCloudSLA}.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is not a guarantee that the uptime percentage will actually be a least 99.9\%, but in case it drops below that, Google will start to reimburse part of the monthly bill for their service, which will be credited to future monthly payments. \cite{GCloudSLA}
```

\textbf{Google Datastore QoS}

> Google datastore will have an uptime percentage of at least 99.9\% for their costumers in a single region and at least 99.95\% for customers having datastores in multiple regions, as per the term of agreement.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Google datastore will have an uptime percentage of at least 99.9\% for their costumers in a single region and at least 99.95\% for customers having datastores in multiple regions, as per the terms of the agreement.
```

> we only use a single region, so our uptime should be 99.9\%.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This solution only relies on a single region, so the expected uptime should be 99.9\%.
```

> As with the Google IoT Core SLA, Google will also start covering a part of the monthly bill for their service the worse uptime they deliver \cite{DatastoreSLA}.

Reviewer 3: Dette er nævnt få linjer længere oppe

> The annual data durability for data hosted on the Google datastore is 99.999999999\%, meaning that it is extremely unlikely that the data will ever be lost \cite{DatastoreDurability}.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The annual data durability for data hosted on the Google Datastore is 99.999999999\%, therefore it is unlikely that data will be lost \cite{DatastoreDurability}.
```

\textbf{Gateway/Sensor Device Crash}

> In case that either the gateway or the sensor device should crash or temporarily lose power, it will restart itself and try to reconnect.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In case that either the gateway or the sensor device should crash or temporarily lose power, it will attempt to restart itself and reconnect.
```

> Should a sensor device lose its connection to the gateway or not be able to connect once returned from deep sleep, it will not take any measurements and instead go back in deep sleep.

Reviewer 3: Vi kalder det ikke deep sleep andre steder i rapporten så vidt jeg ved
```suggestion
Should a sensor device lose its connection to the gateway or not be able to connect once returned from sleep, it will not take any measurements and instead return to sleep.
```

If the gateway loses connection to the backend it would store received messages in memory and resend them once a connection is reestablished.

> If however the gateway loses power during this phase the messages would become lost.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If however, the gateway loses power during this phase the messages would be lost.
```

\textbf{MQTT QoS}

MQTT has three levels of QoS:

At level 0 it is guaranteed that a specific message is delivered at most once.

> However, this means that there is no guarantee that the message is received at all.

Reviewer 3: Det hedder 'fire and forget' og er det QoS indstillingen bliver kaldt, kan være det skal tilføjes

At level 1 it is guaranteed that a specific message is delivered at least once.
This is done by the sender storing the message until it gets an acknowledgment that the message has been received.

At level 2 it is guaranteed that a specific message is delivered exactly once.

> This is done by having a four part handshake between the sender and receiver.

Reviewer 3: Måske sætte dette op i en itemize

> A higher level of quality means that there is a higher guarantee that the message has been received, and that it has been received correctly.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A higher level of QoS means that there is a guarantee that the message has been sent and received.
```

> The downside to a higher QoS is that it is slower \cite{MQTTQoS}.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
However, the downside of a higher level is a speed penalty \cite{MQTTQoS}.

```

Our product uses level 0, which means that he messages that get sent from the sensor device to the gateway are not lossless, as they are only sent once and no acknowledgement is used to verify its arrival.
This means that if the gateway fails to get the message on the first try, then the message will get lost.

> Ideally we should be using level 1, but that is not possible because of a client library that we are currently using.\todo{Explain what client library?}

Reviewer 3: Vi bruger ikke level 0 hele vejen, kun fra sensor device til gateway
Jeg er ret sikker på at der er QoS fra gateway til cloud

Author: Hvad bruger vi så der? level 1?

\textbf{Sensor Device QoS}

Some versions of the ESP32 can connect to Wi-Fi at a range of 1km when having a clear line of sight \cite{1km}.

> Inside a factory the range will be much lower due to interference from machines, large metal objects and other networking equipment etc.\cite{alma9920648465405762}.

Reviewer 3: Men er det vores ESP32 der kan det? 
Det her er implementation, ikke hvad vi kunne have brugt

\section{Quality of Service}
This section describes the Quality of Service(QoS) of the system in terms of limitations and guarantees.

\textbf{Power Consumption Measurements}

The sensor device is powered by a 2000mAh 5V battery and is constructed using the ESP32 development board as described in~\autoref{sec:sensordevice}.
Some test have been conducted trying to estimate the battery life of the device as described in~\autoref{sec:sprint-log-3}.
Another consideration that was not taken into account was that the ESP32 is able to use two different speeds on the I$^2$C communication.
By using the high speed mode the data transfer rate would increase by a factor of three, as described in~\autoref{sec:MaxSampleRateTest}.
The results of this test was that no guarantee of battery lifetime could be given and since they depend heavily on device configurations no exact guarantee is given.

\textbf{Maximum Number of Devices Per Gateway - Scalability}

No tests have been conducted to determining how many devices can be connected to a single gateway.
However, there are some other limiting factors that can be determined from examining the hardware.

> Wi-Fi bandwith of Raspberry Pi 3 B+ averages at 81.9 Mbits/s in perfect conditions \cite{PiSpeed}.

Reviewer 4: Jeg kan se at vi længere nede skriver noget om dette

If however, the gateway loses power during this phase the messages would be lost.

\textbf{MQTT QoS}

MQTT has three levels of QoS:

\begin{itemize}
\item{At level 0 it is guaranteed that a specific message is delivered at most once.
However, this means that there is no guarantee that the message is received at all.
This is also known as "fire and forget".}

\item{At level 1 it is guaranteed that a specific message is delivered at least once.
This is done by the sender storing the message until it gets an acknowledgment that the message has been received.}

\item{At level 2 it is guaranteed that a specific message is delivered exactly once.
This is done by having a four part handshake between the sender and receiver.}
\end{itemize}

A higher level of QoS means that there is a guarantee that the message has been sent and received.
However, the downside of a higher level is a speed penalty \cite{MQTTQoS}.

Our product uses level 0 between the sensor device and the gateway and therefore the data is not lossless, as they are only sent once and no acknowledgement is used to verify its arrival.

> This means that if the gateway fails to get the message on the first try, then the message will get lost.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This means that if the gateway fails to get the message on the first try, then the message will be lost.
```

> Ideally we should be using level 1, but that is not possible because of a client library that we are currently using.\todo{Explain what client library?}

Reviewer 4: Fix todo

Level 1 is used between the gateway and the cloud and that part is, therefore, more reliable.

\textbf{Sensor Device QoS}

Inside a factory the Wi-Fi range will be much lower due to interference from machines, large metal objects and other networking equipment etc. \cite{alma9920648465405762}.

\textbf{Physical Environment Resilience}

> As described in~\autoref{subsec:designSensorDevice} the sensor devices should be ridged enough to operate in the harsh environment of a production environment.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
As described in~\autoref{subsec:designSensorDevice} the sensor devices should be rigid enough to operate in the harsh environment of a production environment.
```

The devices chosen is able to operate within a wide range of temperatures.
The both the ESP32 and the MPU-6050 can operate from -40 to 125 degrees celsius, which makes them ideal for many industrial environments \cite{ESP32Datasheet}.

> They are however still electronic component that are not protected against crushing and blunt force trauma which should be protected against with the use of a prober case.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
There are however still electronic component that are not protected against crushing and blunt force trauma which should be protected against with the use of a prober case.
```

\section{Quality of Service}
This section describes the QoS of the system in terms of limitations and guarantees.

\textbf{Power Consumption Measurements}

The sensor device is powered by a 2000mAh 5V battery and is constructed using the ESP32 development board as described in~\autoref{sec:sensordevice}.
A test has been conducted trying to estimate the battery life of the device as described in~\autoref{sec:sprint-log-3-review}.
Another consideration that was not taken into account was that the ESP32 is able to use two different speeds on the I$^2$C communication.
By using the Fast mode the data transfer rate was increased by a factor of three, as described in~\autoref{sec:MaxSampleRateTest}.
All the measurements was conducted using the ESP32 development board which has a higher power consumption then the actual device.
The estimated lifetime does also not include the gradual discharge of the battery again resulting in a less accurate estimate.

> The temperature of the environment do have a genative effect on the dischange of the battery \cite{batteryuniversity} this is however not tested and does also not effect the estimated battery life.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The temperature of the environment do have a genative effect on the dischange of the battery \cite{batteryuniversity} this was however not tested and does also affect the estimated battery life.
```

\section{Quality of Service}
This section describes the Quality of Service(QoS) of the system in terms of limitations and guarantees.

\textbf{Power Consumption Measurements}

> The sensor device is powered by a 2000mAh 5V battery, and when using an ESP32 without the development board, and using on/sleep cycles, the battery should last at least 2 months as describe in~\autoref{sec:sprint-log-2}, when using the right configurations.

Reviewer 3: "right configurations" er ret intet sigende

However, this means that there is no guarantee that the message is received at all.
This is also known as "fire and forget".}

\item{At level 1 it is guaranteed that a specific message is delivered at least once.
This is done by the sender storing the message until it gets an acknowledgment that the message has been received.}

\item{At level 2 it is guaranteed that a specific message is delivered exactly once.
This is done by having a four part handshake between the sender and receiver.}
\end{itemize}

A higher level of QoS means that there is a guarantee that the message has been sent and received.
However, the downside of a higher level is a speed penalty \cite{MQTTQoS}.

Our product uses level 0 between the sensor device and the gateway and therefore the data is not lossless, as they are only sent once and no acknowledgement is used to verify its arrival.
This means that if the gateway fails to get the message on the first try, then the message will get lost.
Ideally we should be using level 1, but that is not possible because of a client library that we are currently using.\todo{Explain what client library?}

> Level 1 is used between the gateway and the Cloud and that part is therefore more reliable.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Level 1 is used between the gateway and the cloud and that part is, therefore, more reliable.
```

\textbf{Physical Environment Resilience}

As described in~\autoref{subsec:designSensorDevice} the sensor devices should be rigid enough to operate in the harsh environment of a production environment.
The devices chosen is able to operate within a wide range of temperatures.

> The both the ESP32 and the MPU-6050 can operate from -40 to 125 degrees celsius \cite{ESP32Datasheet}\cite{MPUdatasheet}.

Reviewer 4: The both the -> Both the

> There are however still electronic component that are not protected against crushing and blunt force trauma which should be protected against with the use of a prober case.

Reviewer 4: component -> components
